# Appendix D. Contributing to Podman

[]{#D.htm#pgfId-1286424}My favorite []{#D.htm#marker-1286423}thing about
open source is the community effort. It is great to be able to
contribute to a project and, better yet, get people to contribute to
your project. The analogy I like to use comes from the *Grimms' Fairy
Tales* story "The Elves"
([https://sites.pitt.edu/\~dash/grimm039.html](https://sites.pitt.edu/~dash/grimm039.html){.url}):

[]{#D.htm#pgfId-1286426 .calibre17}A shoemaker, through no fault of his
own, had become so poor that he had only leather enough for a single
pair of shoes. He cut them out one evening, then went to bed, intending
to finish them the next morning. Having a clear conscience, he went to
bed peacefully, commended himself to God, and fell asleep. The next
morning, after saying his prayers, he was about to return to his work
when he found the shoes on his workbench, completely finished.

[]{#D.htm#pgfId-1286427}The story goes on to describe a couple of elves
that come by each night and finish the shoes. I see this as the way open
source works. Basically, the people doing little contributions, bug
reporting, bug fixes, document fixes, feature requests, and publicizing
the project are all the elves. Sometimes I even go to bed, and when I
wake up I'll find someone has fixed the problem I was attempting to deal
with the night before! And sometimes the elves grow up to be
maintainers. Some small contributions over time grow, and these
developers end up being core members of the Podman team. Some we even
hired.

## []{#D.htm#pgfId-1286429}D.1 Joining the community {#D.htm#heading_id_3 .fm-head}

[]{#D.htm#pgfId-1286432}Each
[]{#D.htm#marker-1286430}[]{#D.htm#marker-1286431}small change helps
make the project better. When I talk to college students about open
source, I tell them about the unique opportunities they have, which were
not around when I was a student. They can make a contribution to a
software project or product and then list it on their resume. When
interviewing a student for an internship or a job, having a few
github.com contributions on a resume is very impressive.

[]{#D.htm#pgfId-1286433}Podman and its underlying technologies are
always looking for new contributions (figure D.1). No contribution is
too small---from a spelling mistake in a man page up to a full-blown
feature. You don't have to be a software developer to contribute. We are
always looking for help on documentation, web design for podman.io, as
well as software help. Many great ideas come from users of the product.
Just reporting a bug or reporting what you don't like can lead to fresh
ideas that improve the project. I often ask people who have set up
complicated environments using Podman to blog about it, so others can
learn.

::: figure
![](images/OEBPS/Images/D-01.png){.calibre18}

Figure D.1 Podman\'s Community page
([https://podman.io/community](https://podman.io/community){.url})
:::

[]{#D.htm#pgfId-1286442}Podman is an inclusive community, as are all of
the github.com/containers projects[]{#D.htm#marker-1286443}. The code of
conduct statement for the containers project at
[http://mng.bz/5mEB](http://mng.bz/5mEB){.url} states the
[]{#D.htm#marker-1286445}[]{#D.htm#marker-1286446}following:

[]{#D.htm#pgfId-1286447 .calibre17}*As contributors and maintainers of
the projects under the*
[https://github.com/containers](https://github.com/containers){.url1}
*repository, and in the interest of fostering an open and welcoming
community, we pledge to respect all people who contribute through
reporting problems, posting feature requests, updating documentation,
submitting pull requests or patches, and other activities to any of the
projects under the containers umbrella.*

## []{#D.htm#pgfId-1286449}D.2 Podman on github.com {#D.htm#heading_id_4 .fm-head}

[]{#D.htm#pgfId-1286453}Issues,
[]{#D.htm#marker-1286450}[]{#D.htm#marker-1286451}discussions, and pull
requests reside on the
[github.com/containers/podman](http://github.com/containers/podman){.url}
repository (figure D.2)[]{#D.htm#marker-1286454}. As of this writing,
the project has over 1,200 forks and 12,000 stars. The bottom line is it
is a very active project.

::: figure
![](images/OEBPS/Images/D-02.png){.calibre18}

Figure D.2 Podman\'s github page
([github.com/containers/podman](https://github.com/containers/podman){.url})
:::

[]{#D.htm#pgfId-1286461}You can also communicate directly with the core
maintainers on IRC on the #podman channel on libera.chat. The IRC
channel is also linked to #podman:matrix.org
([https://matrix.to/#/#podman:matrix.org]{.url}) on Matrix and the
Podman Discord
([https://discord.com/invite/x5GzFF6QH4](https://discord.com/invite/x5GzFF6QH4){.url})
for web access.

[]{#D.htm#pgfId-1286467}There is also a low-volume mailing list you can
join by sending an email to podman-join@lists.podman.io. Finally, you
can follow \@podman_io on Twitter or follow
[]{#D.htm#marker-1286468}[]{#D.htm#marker-1286469}me
[]{#D.htm#marker-1286470}\@rhatdan.

[]{#E.htm}
